---
date: 2025-07-29 12:00
title: Emacs?
categories: [computing]
tags: [emacs]
---

I've decided to take a look at [Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/). This is despite my on-going project to learn how to use [Neovim](https://neovim.io/). But I've realised that the two are not necesarilly synonomous with Neovim being, at its heart, a text editor whilst Emacs is more of a 'computing environment' which contains an editor.

Whilst I enjoy writing in Neovim the fact that it is a text editor at heart means that it always feels a bit like everything else is shoe-horned into it to try to add functionality to make it into an editor I would use to replace something like [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/). It can be done but it all feels a bit clumsy. Maybe Emacs will suit me better.

> As an aside, I had to visit the VS Code home page to fine the link in the previous paragraph and was met by the following in the hero section: "The open source AI code editor". The alone wames me want to move on from using VS Code but that's a different rant for a different blog post.

## Learning The Basics

I tend to learn best from books (ideally physical) and whilst I know that the official Emacs guide can be downloaded and printed out I wanted something a bit less dry.

Modern Emacs books tend not to be a thing so I picked a comparatively recent book from 2015, [Harley Hahn's Emacs Field Guide](https://www.harley.com/emacs/index.html). However it is only after the first 70 pages that Emacs gets installed and you are ready to start using it. This is a book with some very obvious padding and it all feels like the author has recycled content from other books they have written about Linux. I was increasingly unsure that this was the book for me.

And then a colleague told me about [Mastering Emacs](https://www.masteringemacs.org/) which is both much more recently written and much better at getting to the point. It is only available as an ebook so at the moment I am reading it on my iPad whilst I tinker on my laptop but I may get a physical copy printed.

There are also a plethora of video on YouTube and the ones which seem to have clicked the best with me are ones by [System Crafters](https://www.youtube.com/c/systemcrafters).

And then of course there are blog posts and places like Stack Overflow too. And this blog too where I can keep notes to remind myself about the things I learn.

## My Planned Approach

As I learnt from dipping my toe into Neovim, the best way to learn something new and complex is to use it as much as possible. I'm starting to swite things like blog posts in Emacs and will try some coding in it soon too but I have a feeling that the initial learning curve will be even higher than Neovim's was for me.

I'm going to build up a list of commands and key presses and maybe a glossary of terms too because, partly due to its age and pre-dating a lot of more modern, accepted terms, Emacs uses some terminology which is very different to what most of us are used to. For example, syntax highlighting is called Font Locking and cutting, copying and pasting are killing, saving to the kill ring and yanking. Apparently this will all make sense at some point and it encapsulates a better approach.

I am also going to write specific blog posts about how things are done. For example, I recently had to update the internal links in my blog after changing the theme and configuration. I did that in VS Code because I am familiar with searching a 'project' (a folder hierarchy of files) and replacing text but I want to work out how I would do it efficiently in Emacs, and maybe also work out how I would do it in Neovim.

And really this is just me having a play with something new to see if it works better for me than Neovim or VS Code does. It might not in which case this might be a very short series of posts.

## Very First Impressions

There is something splendidly eccentric about Emacs which is like enormously. It's very alien and I feel terribly clumsy using it but there is an underlying feeling that a system which has been around for decades must have something going for it and so digging into it should be a lot of fun.

Watch this space.
