---
date: 2025-12-26 12:00
title: 10K
categories: [personal development]
tags: [exercise, physical health, running]
---

On 14 December I did my first 10K. Both in terms of distance and event.

Back in July I had just finished a parkrun with a friend and she mentioned that for the previous couple of years she and some friends had taken part in a Christmas 10k fun run. I agreed to join them this year.

The event was the [Weston AC Christmas Cracker](https://westonac.co.uk/races-2/christmas-cracker/), an annual race which takes place in Weston-super-Mare where participants are encouraged to wear festive fancy dress. The race course is a combination of running on the beach and on tarmac along the promenade.

## Preparation

In the lead-up to the race, the furthest I had run was 6.25 km back in August. By race day the furthest I had run was 6.25 km. Not ideal preparation.

The weather in November and early December was grim and it seemed like it was raining almost every day. My outdoor running efforts were non-existent. However I had been doing some slow running on a treadmill at my CrossFit gym and those sessions tended to be almost an hour so I was at least used to running for a reasonable time.

Mentally I had decided that I was taking part in a fun run, in a costume, on sand so I had no expectations about my performance and was fully expecting to mix running with walking. I wasn't going to focus on a time, rather I would try to enjoy a social run with friends.

## Race Day

Fortune smiled on us and the weather finally changed on race day and rain was replaced by sunshine, albeit with a bit of a cold breeze.

I was pleased that I was with friends because whilst the whole process of collecting my race number and timing chip and working out what to do with them turned out to be simple, it was also daunting for a first-timer. If you are going to your first race then it might be worth finding and watching a couple of videos about affixing your number to your vest and the timing chip to your shoe.

The start of the race was like a giant parkrun and it took a little while for us to cross the line and find some clear space to settle into a comfortable pace. The marshals were great and cheered us on and it was my first experience of spectators supporting us too. The whole atmosphere was relaxed and fun and exactly as I had hoped.

The first five kilometers were pretty straightforward and whilst I wasn't tracking our pace I knew it was reasonable; slightly slower than a parkrun but definitely not completely relaxed.

By kilometer seven I was getting tired and was running with Clare (her daughter was ahead of us somewhere and her two friends somewhere behind) and we fell into a pattern of saying that we might walk for a bit when we got to the next kilometer marker. We never did and we actually ran the entire distance.

The last kilometer was probably the worst and my legs felt heavy and my neck and shoulders were getting really stiff. But the end was literally in sight and we both agreed that within a few minutes of finishing we'd be feeling a lot better physically as well as the mental boost from finishing and having run the full distance.

We crossed the line side-by-side with Annabel, who had finished ahead of us, cheering us on. And a couple of minutes later her friends also finished.

## My Result


## Next?


